Yep.
Right ho. Um, we are now going into the hearing
of evidence for the Education
and Training, early Childhood Education Reform Amendment
Bill and the Early Childhood Council.
First in person, uh, for 10 minutes. Over to you, Simon
Kia. Uh, thank you
for having me here. Really appreciate it.
Um, if you don't all know about, um,
the Early Childhood Council, we are an incorporated society
with the largest association in the early childhood sector.
Uh, we are not-for-profit. Uh, 70%
of our members are private providers.
30% are community based.
80% of all our members operate one single standalone center.
Um, we are strongly supportive of what's happening here
with the EC reforms.
And I would say, um, in particular, we welcome the move
to one regulator.
It's not an obvious decision which one you would choose,
but, um, but it had to be one of them
because having multiple regulators leads to inconsistency
and, uh, people kind of rechecking and,
and changing each other's views on the same issues.
Uh, these, these changes cannot come soon enough.
This piece of legislation is part of a much broader series
of reforms, but it is a really critical
piece for the first time.
We're going to see what the purpose of regulation is,
and I think that's probably, we,
we are very supportive of that.
So one of the key changes in the, in the objectives
or purpose of being inserted is around, um,
being clear that it's not just educational outcomes
that are important, it's also developmental outcomes.
'cause uh, children, you know, brain development
and things, you can't really classify that as educational.
That is interactions with adults, quality interactions,
and it helps them feel settled and emotionally, um, stable.
The early childhood curriculum provides for this,
and it is really good to see it in the legislation.
For some children, just getting out
of a dangerous home environment
and into a safe quality center environment is
a big benefit in itself.
Um, so I think that's really important to acknowledge.
What I would also like to say is, um, where we are recent,
we're still working with issues
with the Ministry of Education.
I have a current case of a center that has, um,
had its license canceled
because it, um, failed to
update its incorporated societies' return,
and it got struck off the register, lost its license.
Um, we're again, happy to go through a court process to try
and get that, um, fixed,
but it's quite, it's an incredibly, like,
it's absolutely a critical legal failing,
but losing the license.
This is a small Pacific provider in Auckland.
It's just so out of proportion for what, what's happened.
Uh, so we will, we look forward to not having
to do cases like that in the future.
If there is this new director of regulation function
where there's a, there's a single point of accountability.
That is one of the current problems.
If I have a problem with early childhood, I have to go
to the Secretary of Education
because only the secretary has accountability for all
of the various different deputy
secretaries and regional offices.
And it's, um, not a, not an efficient
or practical way of working.
So having this clear point
of accountability will, will really help.
Um, the other point is really not in the
legislation, but it is around standards, clear standards.
And I don't think it needed to be legislated,
but having a clear standard is what providers crave
because they want to comply.
They do not, they're not, um, people you should distrust.
Most of them were teachers who worked as teachers
and then became, they set up a center
and became an owner of a center
because that was their dream.
It's like the Kiwi dream to one, like open a business
and own a business in New Zealand.
If you're a teacher in early childhood,
that's the ultimate dream.
So these are not people
that you should fundamentally mistrust
and they are good people who want to do the right thing.
Even if you've got people who are, you know,
purely profit motivated, even those people, they need to,
they need to maintain parent trust,
parents dropping off children.
They need to know it's safe. It's critical.
The re the sector needs the regulation to help ensure
that everyone knows that it is safe in early childhood.
So nobody wants to see that changed.
We all want to see that enhanced and made better,
but having clear standards will
be, will be really important.
So that stuff that will need to be done
by this director role.
Okay. That, I think that's enough of my remarks, questions.
Yeah. Thank you. So thank you for your submission.
In your submission, uh, you have said that the
regulatory function being split between MOE
and ERO, uh, is causing some confusion.
Can you elaborate on that?
Yep. Okay. The ERO in recent years has moved
to, as part of their review,
they have an education review process
before they get into the review of how, well,
what was the quality in the center.
They look at compliance.
So they do a, basically a desktop analysis of
have you complied with the safety, checking all
of the basic regulations.
If they find a mistake previously,
they would not go any further.
They wouldn't do a review.
They would just send the center back to the ministry
and say to the ministry, you need to do a licensing visit.
We don't think they're complying with the regulations.
So you wouldn't even get your review of how you were doing.
Then the ministry would come in
and say, well, actually we've had a look at this.
We disagree with ero.
They, they're fine, or they'd have different views on
different parts of the regulations.
Safety checking is a really key one where both education
and ERO have a, a very peculiar view around safety checking.
But under the legislation
that institutions make the risk assessments
and it is their decision under the legislation
what assessment they make, that's
what the legislation actually says.
But both agencies come in
and say, well, if we saw this information,
this is what we would've done.
But that's not what, that's not how it's meant to work.
So people end up being, you know, kind
of battered from post to post. Got it. Thank you
Chad. Thanks
Simon. And I'd love to have the opportunity to talk
with you further about this, 'cause we're not going
to have time today, but I do have a really important
question because you talked about, uh, this being part
of a wider, uh, review related part of work
that's being carried out.
And I have some of your members who are totally opposed
to this bill that have come to me around this,
and some of your parents from your centers too,
and a lot of your parents from
your centers are coming to me.
So it's obvious to me that it's very polarizing
and it's sitting one here, one there.
So you talked about, as I said, the wider part of this,
we know from the treasury, uh, dump
of project documents last week
that the funding review isn't going we,
and as fast as what it's intended to do.
In fact, they talked against that without that.
And with this alone, this is putting pressure on a system
and people are telling me that instead of removing, um,
instead of looking for quality early childhood education,
this is removing the drivers which support that quality
and the funding requirements.
I'm just reading what one of your members has said to me,
which support qualified teachers in the sector
and shifting further away from ECE being
seen as a public good.
Could you talk to that please?
Yeah, that's a really fair point.
And I think we need to remind ourselves
that you are not gonna be able
to make everyone happy all of the time.
And there's always gonna be a diversity of views.
Certainly that would be a minority position
that from my perspective, I think it's
because people are, they fear what they don't know.
They don't, they can't understand
what it's gonna look like in the future.
It's hard enough for us, right.
Working out, um, when we are looking at it now.
Uh, but I think you do need to trust that so long
as it makes the, makes it safer
and supports what it says in the review, uh,
it will, it will improve it.
Um, that you mentioned about qualified staff,
though there's a lot of kind of misinformation
and disinformation going around.
There is no proposal in either of those work streams
around either regulation
or funding that would reduce the, either the role
of the profession or,
or diminish, um, the, the qualification.
What is intended as to build on what we've already got
and to support the workforce more generally
to build up even more qualifications.
Because look at other industries
where you don't have qualifications,
you have people on minimum wage.
That's, we, we've done better in ECE, so,
and we can do better still.
You wouldn't want to go backwards. I'd love
To talk to you further.
Very, um, have time
Now. Very
quick question from me.
You make the point about the, uh, um,
Billy Childhood Center in South Auckland
that's been challenged a lot of feedback against this
that I receive, uh, seems to suggest this is all to benefit
larger multi-center, uh, businesses.
But what you've just said about that, um,
south Auckland example contradicts that
and would love a concluding comment from you on that. Look,
Look, as a worry, even from ECCs point of view,
our lifeblood are those small independent providers
and we are tracking the, them being pushed out
of the industry entirely if, if things don't change and,
and the, the demand is getting picked up
by the larger providers.
And I don't know if that's really
what we want to do in New Zealand.
I think the small independent providers provide really good
choice, really good quality.
It's not where we want to be going
And this is gonna help them.
This, this should help them. Yeah.
Great. Thank you so much
for your time and this morning Simon.
Appreciate you coming in person. Um, we now have Dr.
Mark Bedford from the ECE reform in person.
We'll join us at, uh, the table.
We've got you for 10 minutes mark, including any time
for questions you give us.
Um, so straight over to you.
Thank you. Um, so I won't take very much time.
I'd, I'd like to, uh,
like leave a bit of time for questions.
Um, but just for a quick bit of background, um, so I've,
given, we've given background on the EC reform
form organization.
Uh, just a little bit about myself.
Um, I've worked in sector for over three decades
and I've estimated I would've made, visited
around about 700 early childhood centers.
I wasn't counting, um, estimated about 1500 visits.
And just from a comment someone made to me, I thought,
thinking about it, I think I probably spent about two
and a half thousand hours just listening
to early childhood teachers.
And it's out of that experience.
The ECE reform was born
because what we realized is
that the entire system is in fact broken.
It is. And it's not getting fixed at
the moment I would like to say.
Um, but this little move here
and is a small change, uh, we saw as potentially beneficial.
Um, I'll just mention also in relation to my organization,
uh, the organization I lead that, um, amongst the advisors
and the hub leaders, we have a
phenomenal network of knowledge.
People with huge experience in the sector.
They know the teachers,
they know the center managers, they know the organizations.
I know the history of all the organizations in the sector,
many of the people involved.
Um, I agree with much of what Simon said,
but I'm gonna give a little balance to that.
Um, I, I know that there are some
of the best people you'd ever want
to meet in the early childhood sector.
I've also met center owners that put a child down my spine.
I've met people who I think would have no qualms about
operating child sweat shops where they're allowed to do it
and they operate some of the bigger organizations.
Mm-hmm. That's where the, the major danger is.
However, one of the worst people I met was, um, an,
an owner of a 5 cent group.
And, um, it, it was not pleasant.
But, um, so, so that's a balance.
And, and so in supporting this legislation,
um, we, we actually were in a slightly surprising position
because my first thought was,
oh my goodness, this doesn't look good.
And I thought, actually no, this has huge potential
for good, but it has risk.
And that risk is corruption
because the position
of the director would sit in the top tier
of positions in government
that could be corrupted open to corruption.
And the early childhood sector, unfortunately is
absolutely primed for corruption
because you have so much money to make.
Don't think that all centers are losing money.
One family has made in excess
of $300 million profit in the,
and that's after tax in the last decade out of a sector.
Government funds parent fees going straight to their pocket.
You can make money. The way you make money is you drive down
the conditions minimum ratios, minimum space per child,
especially minimum space per child.
Pack them ent tight as you can. That's where the money is.
You keep your conditions down.
So that's a concern
and that's one of the reasons that we want information to go
to parents so they can read the label.
Are you looking at a minimum standard center?
Because centers advertise with all sorts of glossy bump, uh,
giving example, um, from that same organization making
that much money and reliever, who, um,
this organization advertised a one to four ratio
for children under two years old, which in a number
of jurisdictions in the world would be illegal.
I've reviewed about 40 or so jurisdictions.
Um, but it's better. Our minimum one to five.
Um, and they said we had 11 children, two teachers, five
of the children were babies while advertising one to four.
That's how you make money. So
that means we need information on what's actually going on.
So what we've proposed is strengthening the systems
to gather that information
and strengthening the systems
to give the information to parents.
We need proper access for research
and you'll see my proposal for that.
Um, but the best resource
of information is the teaching workforce.
These are the qualified people who know what's going on.
I've learned a huge amount from talking
to relievers 'cause they see everything.
Mm-hmm. And sometimes what happens when I talk
to reliever is they'll tell me horrifying stories.
And I'm saying, but you've
seen a number of them, haven't you?
And I said, yeah, it's
because it's not that unusual to cry out
of the sector when we have 11% of teachers, sorry, 11%
of respondents in a 4,000 teacher survey.
Um, Sarah would be able to speak to that one.
Um, saying
that they're working at worse than minimum ratios.
It's not be fooled that the sector is. Okay.
So one thing I want to ask
for is scrutiny on the appointment of the director
that we do not want a director
that is connected to a commercial lobby group.
We don't want someone who can be used as the friend
of the people who will corrupt the system if they can.
And that's the dark side.
On the good side, I think, um, oh,
the other thing I'll just mention is
that when I look at the history of the Ministry
of Education, um, to be honest, I don't think the position
of the director could do worse than we have seen.
We have seen the ministry lie outright
to the news media in the past decade.
Um, mislead parliament, hide information,
and I have been the support person for a teacher
who made a complaint to the ministry, took the ministry
to the Privacy Commission, and that was
because she lost her job.
'cause the ministry provided her identity to the employer.
So we need a big cleanup on the ministry side as well.
The position of the director needs to be clean.
Um, I think I'll leave it open to questions now. Okay,
Jan, thanks Mike and lovely to see you.
And thank you for your submission.
Um, always good to hear from you in the work
that you've done in the early childhood sector.
I guess you heard my questions before. Yes.
And this has been really polarizing. Yes.
With submissions that have come in.
One, I have to say
that your submission is polarizing in itself
'cause you've got the good parts and the parts that need
to if we don't get this right.
So my question is, do you have confidence that this bill
as it stands at the moment, without any changes to it,
would promote and would give people confidence in quality
early childhood education being provided?
Oh, absolutely not. It's impossible.
Um, you've, you've already seen
what I've said about the ratios of space per child.
So regardless of the position of the director,
while we have those regulations in place,
the sector is inherently dangerous.
Okay. So I would say that from every single center
that has a one to five ratio
for children under two years old, you will,
you will have children coming out damaged
because it is dangerous, it is unworkable.
So the best that we can do is tell parents what
that center says, what's on the label.
Okay. So compare it with the health bar,
with the glossy advertising,
you look on the back, it's 40% sugar.
Okay? So you don't have to go into any
of the advertising bumps.
You know that these people don't care about your health.
Same with early childhood center.
If they've, if they're operating minimum ratios
for children under three, forget it.
They don't care about your health, about your children
that's there for money because no one who knows about
what children need will operate those ratios.
And I was present at a, a select committee for pay relation
to pay parity, where we had people presenting saying they
would close their centers before
they approach it at minimum ratio.
So that's really important.
So yeah, no, this doesn't fix that,
but it can give the parents the information.
If we can't get the regulations changed,
we can at least tell the parents the regulations are
crap and do something with that.
Thank bluntly.
Any other questions? Mark? Um, grant? Yeah. Thank
You. Um, yeah,
look, I'm just, I wanna go back to you mate.
A fairly corruption's a fairly strong word. Yes. Right?
And there's one I think get very careful about using
and you were saying the appointment with the director,
you don't, you is, is a high level of risk of corruption.
Yes. Um, given the person will obviously have,
obviously have an important role
and will go through a process to be appointed and will be
and will be and and will be looked
after, will be scrutinized and that sort of thing.
Yeah. I'm really a little bit concerned.
I'm just wondering how you can make that statement.
The reason I'm making the statement is I'm saying we have
the conditions in the sector for it.
So I'm not saying that, but
The sector's not appointing Person.
No, no. But what I'm saying is,
if you have a person appointed who would be usable
by the bad elements in the sector,
that's where the problem sits.
I'm not saying this will happen.
What what I'm doing is I'm saying we looked at
what the risks were and so that's where the risk sits.
I'm not saying it's gonna happen.
Um, so you can see overall we supported the bill
'cause we looked what's the risk, what's the
benefit, balance benefit.
Mm-hmm. But not without risk.
And so we we're just pointing to where
that risk sits, not saying it would happen.
Okay. Thanks so much, Mike, for taking time
to present to us in person this morning.
We really appreciate your, um, and your contribution.
Now invite, uh, the team from Save the Children New Zealand.
We're here in person as well. Oh, great, Jackie. Sure.
Thanks for joining us. Thank you.
Um, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions.
I'll hand straight over to you. Great. Thank you.
Child Rights Advocacy
and research director for Save the Children.
Save the Children welcomes opportunity
to provide an oral submission on the education
and training Early childhood Education Reform Amendment
Bill Save the Children.
As one of the world's leading child rights organizations
founded more than 100 years ago, to uphold
and advance the rights of children here
in New Zealand and globally.
And we have been working here in New Zealand
for more than 75 years.
Save the Children has a vested interest in the education
system as it plays a critical role in ensuring the social,
emotional and educational development
of children their wellbeing.
And in upholding their rights.
The New Zealand government is obligated to uphold the rights
of children under the convention on the rights of the child.
And the early childhood system directly
impacts their rights.
Quality. Early childhood education can be transformational
for children, their parents and society.
And therefore it's critical that any changes to regulations
and or legislation will not negatively impact the quality
of early childhood education.
Save the Children does not support the proposed amendments
in the education and training Amendment Bill,
and recommends that the bill should not proceed
in its current form.
In our submission, we wish to make four recommendations.
One, take a child rights approach to ensure
that children's rights under the convention on the rights
of the child, understood, respected
and upheld across the early childhood education system,
undertake a child impact assessment
before any proposed changes implemented, including changes
to legislation.
Three, retain the current purpose
of the early childhood education
of early childhood education, stated in part two
of the Education and Training Act 2020 and four.
Do not establish a director of regulation
that will have a significant impact on the provision,
quality and shape of early childhood education that sits
outside of the Ministry of Education.
We strongly recommend a child rights approach
to ensure the three pillars of children's rights protection,
provision, and participation are understood, respected,
and upheld throughout the early childhood education system
of our New Zealand.
Additionally, that ECE system should respect
and uphold the rights of TAM and their whanau.
Under Ang any proposed changes should
to the ACT should be required
to undertake a child impact assessment
that thoroughly assesses the impact
of proposed changes on children, their families,
and the teaching profession.
It should also consider whether any changes would support
the profession and the quality of care
and education provision.
The current purpose of quality, sorry.
It is a recommendation of Save the Children.
That this, uh, the current purpose stated under part two
of the act is fit for purpose
and should remain the current purpose on quality EC
provision and learning children's health,
safety and wellbeing.
While making provision for parental choice is fit
for purpose, the ability for parents
to participate in the labor market is a secondary outcome
and is directly enabled by the quality provision
of the initial purpose, quality, accessible, and affordable.
Early childhood education should be first driven
by children's care and education needs
and support families in the care
and education of their young children.
It should not be primarily driven
by parental engagement in the paid workforce.
Parents already struggle with the need
to put their young children into care due
to pressures of the paid workforce.
And this could be exacerbated
of workforce participation is seen as the primary purpose
of the early childhood education system.
Prior research has shown
that New Zealand parents already engage in long working
hours and are among the highest in the world.
Previous census data has shown that these working,
the those working the longest hours have no qualifications
and are on lower incomes.
Additionally, previous previous research
by the former Families Commission found that parents
and long workouts had negative impacts on family wellbeing.
Existing high rates of parents
and paid work demonstrates that engagement
and paid workforce is already taking place and
therefore is not necessary to include as the primary purpose
of the early childhood education system.
We are concerned that the proposed director of regulation,
a role that will have significant influence
and qu on the quality
and shape of early childhood education provision, will sit
outside the Ministry of Education.
The director of regulation appears
to be focused on EC regulations related to the operation
of centers and is not clear how the quality
and provision of education
and care outcomes for children are considered
or applied in relation to this role.
Quality education care outcomes for children,
including their health, safety, wellbeing,
and education, are completely reliant on centers
or an alternative model ability to deliver education,
quality education provision.
This delivery is directly related to
and impacted by regulations.
Therefore, it is concerning that the proposal
that the proposed model seems to imply a separation
between quality education provision
and operational regulations.
It is our view that these roles should be integrated.
And we are concerned that a partial implementation
of the EC regulations review may lead to an extensive period
of change and therefore disruption.
It is our view that all necessary changes should be proposed
and thoroughly consulted on in a coherent way
before being agreed and then enforced
through legislative changes.
The review found the EC system was outdated
and not up to standard
of other regulatory systems in New Zealand and,
and incomparable countries.
And the current proposal, it is difficult to see
how amendments to the Pro Proposed Education Training Act
will achieve that improvement of provision and delivery.
Changes to legislation should be be carefully considered
and based on clear evidence
and to ensure the intended outcomes are achieved
and thereby avoiding unintended negative consequences.
Thank you. That concludes our submission
and happy for any questions.
Thank you, Kaji.
Yeah, thank you for your submission.
Uh, uh, one of the previous submitters, uh, said that, uh,
having the regulatory functions split and, um,
and, uh, into two entities, ministry of Education
and caused a confusion and
provided conflicting advice, uh, with, don't you think
that also would lead to not only conflicting advice
for one center, but also non-consistent approach nationwide.
So with the Director of Regulations,
the function sitting at one place would provide that kind
of consistent approach.
I mean, it seems to me in the way that the,
the legislation is described
and the changes are described in the information we have
that that deepens the separation.
In fact, that you have a Ministry
of regulations sitting completely separate to education.
Yet the very purpose of early childhood education is
to educate care for children.
There isn't sufficient information to show
how those two roles come together.
And we've got this tension that's been described
by the previous two submitters between what the centers want
and operational provision versus what parents
and children might be, you know, what's best for them and,
and the provision of education
that they're receiving and that care.
And we have to really clear here
that this is a shared care approach
to our youngest children.
They are completely reliant on the adults that are caring
for them in the system that provides that care.
Many of these children are two young to speak out
for themselves and to say what is happening to them.
So we really have to trust
and enforce a robust system
that delivers the best care for our children.
Jan, thank you for your, um,
your really considered the submission.
I enjoyed reading it, but I enjoyed hearing
that talk with it as well.
Um, I can see that from your submission,
you see early childhood as a education as a public good.
And I wonder whether you could comment
around if you see this bill takes away from that
or moves away from that idea.
I think we need to be very careful about
regressing the concept of early childhood education
as looking after kids while their parents work.
We should stay far, far away from that concept.
Parents do need to work.
That's the reality of parents in New Zealand.
We need to make sure that they can entrust the care
of their youngest children to really well qualified systems
and centers to adults
that are well qualified to look after them.
That there are good processes in place, that it's robust,
that their safety is ensured.
We have had children who have died, young children
who have died in early childhood care.
And so that should not be repeated.
We should do whatever we can to make sure
that the quality comes first, that their care
and education comes first.
And if I as a parent can rely on that quality of care,
I can in good faith engage in the workforce.
Thank you. I I'm interested in the
Commentary you've made around the workforce
and appreciate education as a driver.
Uh, but I'm struggling
to understand why we shouldn't consider, um,
public funding going into, uh, early childhood education
that expects consideration of, uh,
the choice, not the need,
but the choice a lot of women make, uh, to work.
And I've been in centers who have said,
no, they finish at three o'clock.
'cause they don't believe that children
should be there afterwards.
But that's simply not practical for some people, uh,
who choose to work in professions for their own, you know,
uh, professional development for their, uh, career choices
for what they enjoy doing.
So surely it should be an expectation on the early childhood
sector to take
that into account when it's
receiving money from the government.
Yes, and we do, we do see that,
but not as the primary driver, not as the primary purpose
of early childhood education.
That is a secondary outcome.
So it is like, like as we've said now, submission
as I've stated today, if that is delivered well and robustly
and parents can trust and rely on that care
and education of their youngest children.
These are little babies.
We are talking about infants, one, two year olds,
children at difficult developmental stages of their lives,
who also need time with their parents.
And the family's commission made it very clear in their
research that too much time
of parents away from the young children
is in fact detrimental.
So we need to find a balance between parents requirements
of being in the paid workforce
and also being able to care
for their children at home in their homes,
and also have that option of early childhood care
and education that supports the development
and education of their child.
So it's not an either or system.
And one should, uh,
workforce should not outweigh those other
primary considerations.
Thank you very much.
That's all we've got time for this morning.
Thank you In person, Jackie.
Um, we're now moving to parents
of vision impaired New Zealand on Zoom
with Dr. Rebecca Graham
Goodo.
We've got, uh, 10 minutes with you this morning,
including any time for questions. I'll hand over to you.
Oh, thank you so much. Um, I'm Rebecca Graham
and I'm presenting on behalf of Parents of Vision Impaired.
Uh, you will have read, uh, written submission, uh, since
doing our written submission,
the New Zealand Disability Strategy has come out, uh,
and one of the core components for that is education.
And what I'm going to do in my oral, uh, presentation, uh,
is identify the tensions
between what's said in the New Zealand disability strategy
and what is said in this legislation.
And the reason I'm doing
that is a education is a core outcome.
Um, but also it seems like this legislation is a real missed
opportunity to uphold the outcomes that have been agreed to,
uh, in the education part
of the New Zealand disability strategy.
It aligns with my written one pretty, pretty much too.
Uh, so firstly, uh, thinking about participation
and inclusion, uh, the,
there is a clear education goal in the disability strategy,
which is every learner is supported to attend,
participate in progress in education
with high expectations for their success.
It commits to early intervention, uh, increase support
skilled teachers and robust data for disabled learners.
The bill does not support any
of these things in its current form
unless disability inclusion is explicitly embedded
in the bill's objectives and guiding principles
and ideas sitting behind it, inequities remain hidden
for our disabled learners.
Uh, and as I've mentioned in my written submission, uh,
disabled children, including blind
and low vision, children continue to face systemic barriers
to early childhood education.
Uh, our families describe inclusion as a lottery
where whether or not a child is welcomed
and supported within an ECE setting depends very much on
individual centers, individual leadership,
individual teacher attitudes,
rather than on a system-wide guarantee.
There remains long wait times for specialist supports.
There is extremely limited workforce training.
Uh, and several multiple AC environments are
inaccessible for children who have physical disabilities
and access requirements.
Uh, the bill weakens rather than
strengthens ity obligations.
The disability strategy by contrast explicitly acknowledges
ity in its guiding principles
and sets clear expectations in the education section
that TAM and the wau will thrive.
The bill does not, uh, support this in its current form,
the Director of Regulation.
Uh, so there is potential
that creating this role could indeed provide consistency
across the nation, um,
but only if it includes, uh, accessibility
and outcomes for disabled children,
and that these are built into the statutory mandates.
Uh, the disability strategy has an emphasis on
accountability, uh, emphasis on data, uh,
and sets high expectations for all learners.
Unless the director is required to monitor accessibility,
monitor inclusion
and equitable outcomes for disabled learners.
The role becomes purely bureaucratic
with no real impact for our children.
Uh, accessibility and workforce capability.
Uh, the disability strategy, one
of the outcomes in education is around workforce training
and cap capacity building for teachers.
And there is some joint work there with Ministry
of Disabled people to ensure teachers are prepared to plan
for and support the disabled learners in their classrooms.
This bill does not address workforce
developmental training in this regard.
Licensing focuses primarily on ratios
and physical safety, which while important fails
to acknowledge the need for inclusive practice
or that are disabled,
ECE learners often require additional support.
Uh, five child and whanau voice.
Uh, the New Zealand Disability Strategy, uh, has
clear principles around choice and control and participation
and inclusion of disabled people.
This bill has no mechanism for including the voices
of whanau and children.
And without that voice, it doesn't uphold the right
of the disabled child to have a say in matters
that can concern them, as stated in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the child, uh,
and also in the convention on the rights
of Persons with disabilities.
And lastly, data
and monitoring data's a key cross-cutting theme in the
New Zealand disability Strategy.
Uh, the strategy is very explicit
that robust data on disabled learners
and on disabled people is needed to understand
and improve disabled learners experiences and outcomes.
This bill, however, uh, weakens the requirements
for data collection.
This undermines one of the strategies most important shifts,
which is around disa, which is around visibility
for disabled children
and their progress through the education system.
Uh, the recommendations remain the same as in our recommend,
as in our written document.
And lastly, uh, for our families,
ECE isn't just about compliance,
it's about a place of belonging.
It's about their child learning and thriving
unless, uh, disability and inclusion
and relevant components are explicitly embedded
within this legislation.
This re bill risks pulling us backwards
at the very point in time when a refreshed disability
strategy has set a very forward looking vision of education
as being inclusive, equitable,
and with high expectations for every learner.
Uh, I would also add too, I'm not sure if you're aware,
but in Australia, there's some very high horrifying reports
of endemic abuse coming out when, with regards to ECE,
and I would strongly encourage the committee to consider
how we can avoid that
and to make sure that this legislation doesn't create the
conditions for what has happened in Australia.
I think I've done seven minutes,
so you've got three minutes for questions.
Thanks very much. Um, Jan. Hi.
Hi, Rebecca. Lovely to see you.
Um, just question around the, the,
since the disability strategy came out, do you think
that there is room for this bill to be able to be modified
so that it aligns up with the disability strategy?
Or do you think it needs to go back to the,
the drawing board?
Again,
My recommendation would be to go back to the drawing board
and to consider the New Zealand disability strategy
education outcomes
and to rewrite it so that this stuff is embedded.
I don't think it works to modify it in the same way that,
you know, if you have a housing and it a house
and it's inaccessible and you can create modifications,
but it's never anywhere near as good
as if you built it ground up to be accessible.
And I think it would produce much better outcomes for ECE
for both learners and operators, if that is really thought
through in a considered strategic, systematic way.
Great. Thank you, Ji.
Um, thank you. Thank you for your submission.
You have said in your submission
that there hasn't been enough ation.
I want to know from you that you're aware
that last year there was a, a review that happened
and, uh, to more than 2,300 people submitted,
uh, provided their feedback.
Did you take part in that process?
Sorry, I missed the first part of your question. What,
So the first, yeah, so
because in your submission you have said
that there hasn't been enough consultation,
and I want to know from you that the, the ECE, um,
regulatory, um, sector review happened last year.
And in that process, in that engagement
and consultation, more than 2,300 people submitted.
I want to know from you, are you aware that
that process happened and did you take part in that process?
So did that include fa kaha
or consultation with fa kaha in the disability
community in that review? So,
So, uh, the, the opportunity was there for people
to provide information.
I want to know, are you aware,
were you aware of this process?
So you are saying that during that regulatory review,
there wasn't actually explicit attempts to engage
with the disability community and with
No, I'm not saying that.
I'm asking you, are you aware that that process happened?
Well, I'm asking during that.
So, sorry. Sorry. No, no.
I, I think, I think we're taught it's not the space, sorry,
Rebecca, for you to ask questions.
I think if you're not sure on the
answer, then we'll leave the question. Yeah. So
It's, it's fine. So it's,
Oh, so, alright. An answer
to that question, because it did not explicitly
engage with ika and it did not explicitly engage
with the disability community,
our collective voices in the disability community,
were not sufficiently heard.
Okay. Uh, let's move on. Oh, all right. Okay.
That's fine from that. Yeah. Um,
last quick question from me, Rebecca.
Uh, I've had, um, reason recently to engage with, uh,
early childhoods, uh, a, um, centers around, uh,
disability, uh, child access.
You've talked a little bit about this in
your, um, submission.
Do you have any statistics on what percentage of centers
accept and,
and don't accept, um, uh, children with, uh,
varying disabilities?
That is an excellent question
and that is absolutely the sort
of data we should be collecting.
Because what happens is it's a soft no.
So rather than saying no, we don't accept,
they say things like, oh, we are full.
Oh, we don't have the capacity to meet your child's needs.
Oh, you're not coming with additional funding.
So we are unable to provide,
and that's not captured in the data.
Often it's a real tricky thing
because it's not explicitly denying your rights,
but it's also saying, oh, we can't provide a decent service.
And what parent wants to put their child in a, in a, in
That environment. Yeah.
Well, it'll be, it would be interesting
to see some data at the internet space.
'cause my, um, experience was the complete opposite.
It was a welcome. Um, but okay. Appreciate, um, this
Yes, no, it's super variable.
Some experiences are amazing and wonderful and supportive
and others are the complete opposite.
And yes, some proper data would be amazing.
Great. Thank you for your time this morning.
Um, appreciate your question. Um,
we are now inviting the children's commissioner, um,
to join us here in person, uh, for 10 minutes, uh,
including any time for questions over to you.
Nice to see you again. Twice in one week, I think. Yes.
Uh, and now on this very important
of early childhood education.
So I welcome the chance to, um, discuss this kopa
with you today and noting that, uh, you've already received,
uh, my written submission.
So my start point today is to highlight the
critical importance of the first 2000 days
of all children's lives.
Uh, those first 2000 days are so vitally important, uh,
for children's lifetime outcomes.
I attach such importance, um, to these first 2000 days
that one of my four strategic advocacy aspirations
that I work towards as children's commissioner
is a strong start in life for in New Zealand
with early childhood education, quality,
early childhood education being a core component of that.
And I also very much welcome
that under the government's child
and youth strategy, one of the three priority areas
is the importance of supporting families in hanau in the
first 2000 days of children's lives.
That is a really, really good thing.
As I said, early childhood education in RO
and New Zealand needs to be focused on quality
for meeting the needs and the rights of all children.
And that includes our Pacific
and our, I also note
that in New Zealand we have a huge asset which
is unique to the world.
And that is the movement.
Uh, and I want to acknowledge the significant impact that
that has had
and continues to have in the lives
of mu Maori in this country.
I support the current legislation's narrow focus on
children's rights to quality, education, development,
health, safety, and wellbeing.
And I'm strongly of the opinion that the changes
to the legislation must continue to put children's rights
as the basis of this legislation.
And I am concerned about the ways in which the bill dilutes
this perhaps individually.
So I do want to acknowledge that in my time with you today.
I want to draw your attention
to my three main concerns about this bill
and then turn to a couple of the recommendations
that I am making.
So, first of all, in terms
of my three concerns about this bill, firstly that it is,
um, not put in children's rights as the first
and foremost consideration in ECE
regulation and decision making.
As I said, in fact, it is diluting the purpose of ECE
to include more purposes than the core quality education
and care of children.
My second main concern is about, uh, this bill's failure
to ensure TE is upheld as a primary consideration.
And thirdly, I am concerned that this bill is moving ahead.
While other major EC reforms are still in progress,
I really do urge us to take a holistic
and interconnected approach to what is such an important,
uh, area of focus
that affects children in their earliest years
with a lifetime impact.
So I'll now focus in on a few of the recommendations
that I want to draw to your attention.
The first recommendation that I want to emphasize to you is
that I really urge this committee to recommend to the house
to pause the bill to ensure holistic
and effective consultation on all EC reform proposals.
My recommendation
to pause the bill would enable all other reforms to, um, be,
um, seen in alignment and as a whole
and to ensure that, um, wide effective consultation.
I heard the tail end of the, um, last discussion,
and I do want to acknowledge that, um, views
of key stakeholders across the EC sector, um,
were sought at the start
of the EC regulatory, um, review process.
I acknowledge that, but what I'm concerned about is
that there was no further consultation
with key stakeholders when the Ministry
of Regulation finalized.
Its further, um, key recommendations to the government.
So I would've liked to have seen some more comprehensive,
um, consultation on all the proposals.
A further recommendation is
to undertake a child impact assessment on the final
reform proposals.
And this is important to ensure that they truly, um,
uphold children's rights,
children's rights impact assessments, uh,
will ensure quality decision making, um, prevent
or mitigate, uh, potential unintended consequences
and support transparency and policy and implementation.
So now I do want to turn
to if the bill does proceed in its current, um, form, um,
or does proceed without being paused, sorry.
I urge to make children's rights the first
and primary consideration in ECE regulation
in AL or New Zealand.
So should the bill proceed, the purposes, objectives,
and principles in my view should be amended
as described in paragraph five of our written submission.
So first of all, to recognize
and protect all children's rights under the children's
convention, and I advocate to you to recommend that, um,
this is done by being, um, by including in the bill
a specific reference
to the UN convention on the rights of the child.
And this is consistent with other legislation in New Zealand
that directly impacts on children.
Secondly, I'm recommending if the bill does proceed to
explicitly state within it
that children's rights are the first
and paramount consideration in EC
regulation and decision making.
If we step back for a moment, the early childhood, um,
legislation and the early childhood system exists, first
and foremost to serve children.
Yes, it exists to support families and whanau as well.
However, children are at the heart
of early childhood education.
So explicitly stating within this legislation
that they are the first
and paramount consideration is a really reasonable
and important step, um, to be taken in this legislation.
Thirdly, I advocate for TEI to, um,
be an obligation to be clearly embedded in this legislation
to state that TEI must be given effect to
and upheld in EC regulation and decision making.
And fourth, I am urging that, uh,
it is a requirement in the legislation for the director
of regulation to undertake child impact assessments
to ensure that they are exercising their functions, duties,
and powers consistently
with the UN Convention on the rights of the child.
I note that the director of regulation has to make decisions
that have regard to principles such
as the proposed section 27, uh, big D, little D,
which includes the principle, I quote, the principle
of good regulatory practice that
avoids imposing unnecessary costs.
So in my view, a reasonable question for us
to interrogate there is how will the director, uh,
make a judgment call as to what isn't necessary
or unnecessary cost.
This tension I suggest could be solved
through using the child impact assessment process
to provide rigor in deciding what is necessary to protect
and uphold children's rights while implementing good
regulatory practice and ensuring quality early childhood
education provision.
So just to wrap up, um, my comments today, children's rights
to quality early childhood education, development, health,
safety and wellbeing.
These things are at the core of the very purpose
of early childhood education.
And yes, regulation is crucial
and, uh, at its core, I believe, is to protect these rights
for children in ECE to uphold and ensure their safety
and their wellbeing of children in their earliest years.
I do advocate to you to recommend that this bill is paused
to enable comprehensive consultation on the ECE reforms.
I advocate that these reforms need to go
and undergo a child impact assessment so
that children's rights can be adequately
and comprehensively considered.
And I really urge the committee to make the changes
that I have outlined in my written submission
to strengthen this legislation
and to squarely ensure that ECE
and New Zealand is strengthened, is a key component
of ensuring that all children in our country experience the
strongest start in life.
Happy to take any questions here.
Thanks very much, um, for the submission this morning.
I think that's all the time, um, we've used, um,
and appreciate, uh, the,
the recommendations you've made to me.
Thank you much. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, I'm now gonna invite the Auckland Kindergarten
Association to join us, uh, Pauline Winter on Zoo.
Excuse me.
Paul, are you with us there?
Uh, Kia Tato. Can you actually hear me?
Yes, we can hear you. We just can't see you. Uh,
I, I got a strange message said
that I was being promoted to a panel member.
I dunno what that means. So how about I continue?
Um, and those of you that know me know what I look like.
Uh, so TR coaching, uh, here we are.
Host has asked if you would start, start my video.
Sorry, I don't wanna take up too much time. That's right.
Okay. It's not, it's not opening.
So, uh, just to the chair members of the committee, uh,
Pauline Winter from Wai
or Auckland Kindergarten Association, um,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak
to the submission that we have made.
You've got the submission and no doubt have read it.
Um, you know about, uh, our association that spans, uh, Tam
Koda with, uh, county's manko Association
and educate up to 10,000 tamari ki uh,
and the Wau each year.
And 12% of the tamari wau that come to us, uh,
identify as Maori.
We're proud to be a Democratic
or organization, uh, constituent membership
and comprising parent and whanau reps
and our constitution recognized Tutti of Yi
as a founding document of our nation.
Um, so with our submission, you can see that, uh,
we have focused in on, uh, several parts.
I won't be able to get through it all, uh,
but I will highlight the ones of most concern to us.
So the purpose and objectives
for regulating early childhood education, uh, services, uh,
proposes changes.
Uh, so our concerns are
the important of purpose.
Uh, the purpose of the legislation is key as it will govern
how the regulators exercise their powers
and how legislation is interpreted.
The purpose is frame, the way the purpose is framed,
shapes the direction for the entire ECE regulatory system.
So it means that the system will be interpreted in a
mannequin system with a purpose which now includes the labor
market participation.
So we've got concerns with proposed new sections 14
and 14, a labor market participation becoming one
of the two purposes for regulating the provision
of ECE currently.
One of the three purposes for regulating ECE is
to enable parental choice by providing for licensing
and funding are different types of service provision.
So we are concerned that the ECE reform bill changes this
to support the choice of parents
and caregivers to participate in the labor market.
Currently, parental choice is enabled by the availability
of a range of different types of license
and certified EC services.
They're being center based teacher led services such
as education and care services, also known as daycare
or preschool kindergartens, Maori Medium Pacific bilingual
and immersion services center-based, uh, services.
Currently services can choose the hours that they're open
for with some open for a full day
and others operating for shorter hours.
Many kindergartens operate on an eight 30 to two 30 basis
and play centers usually operate in the morning.
Despite these shorter hours, many kindergarten
and play center parents participate in the labor market.
So our concern is that the proposed shift to state
that the labor market participation is the purpose
for regulating ECE will result in an ECE system
that favors services that operate longer hours
and do not expect parental involvement.
This could result in regulations
and funding focusing on ECE providers
that enable full-time participation in the labor market.
So less this, this would result in less choice
for parents in a less diverse range of ECE services,
labor market participation, making that the purpose for ECE
also affects families where one parent chooses not to work.
Those families are highly likely
to still want their children to attend some form
of ECE provision for the benefits
that high quality ECE gives their children
the proposed change will reduce their options
and just some data.
Uh, ECE participation shows that 96.8%
of children regularly attended ECE in the last six months
prior to starting school in the year to June, 2025.
In comparison, the labor force participation rate was 70.5%.
In the June 25 quarter, a very high percentage
of children are attending ECE.
Regardless of the parents' labor market such participation,
uh, we are concerned that neither the purpose
nor the objectives include any reference
to fulfilling the crown's obligation to Maori.
The crown has set treaty settlement obligations that relate
to ECE and there are claims such as the nhu settlement, wa
katoi TU settlement, NA claim settlement, et cetera.
I've listed them in this submission, the Ministry
for Regulations recommend in its regulatory review of EC ECE
that fulfilling the crown's obligation to Maori
TGI be included in the purpose of the act.
Proposed new section 40, we agree with this recommendation.
Um, we recommend
that the ECE reform bills includes the wording providing
for funding, no reference to all children being able
to participate in ECE is what I'm focusing on currently.
The purpose of regulating ECE is to provide for a system
where all children are able
to participate under the proposed new
purpose and objectives.
There's no reference at all to all children
or to children's participation.
The purpose refers to set
and implement minimum standards to provide for quality ECE
that allows children to establish strong foundations
for learning, wellbeing and life outcomes.
And the objectives focus on children who are receiving ECE.
And this is concerning
because as once the purpose changes from a system
where all children are able to participate,
the current regulatory focus on access, affordability
and equity is likely to shift.
This is likely to reduce access
for some children in communities not well served by ECE,
especially given the repeal
of the network management provisions.
It is also unlikely to make it more difficult for children
with learning or other needs to access
ECEA decline in participation in ECE would have ne negative
impacts for children and New Zealand's economy and society.
So we recommend that the ECE reform bill includes the
wording allows all children to participate.
Um, so we have recommended amendments
to the proposed sections of 1414 A in the ECE reform bill.
And we recommend having one purpose section,
which cap captures everything as opposed
to a purpose section and objects objective system.
This would make the interpretation of the act clearer
for regulators, service providers and parents.
Uh, so the recommended amendments change the proposed new
section 14 A to include all children to participate
in the purpose, delete proposed new section 14
B, deleting labor market participation from the purpose
change the proposed new section 14 AC C.
So funding is provided for not just enabled
and include a new purpose
and proposed section 14 to fulfilling the crown's obligation
to Maori under to treaty
or why TANGI is recommended by the Ministry of Regulation.
Uh, we also have submitted around including certainty
and clarity around both minimum
and best practice guidance standards for quality services.
Just move on quickly to
the establishing a new statutory role with responsibility
for performing core regulatory functions.
We are supportive of establishing this role,
the director of regulations.
We agree that this role should have independent functions
relating to issuing licenses and enforcing compliance.
And the minister must not give directions
to the director in those respects.
And we're also supportive of the other functions, providing
and collecting information, providing guidance,
carrying out proactive, regular risk-based monitoring
of compliance by service providers responding to complaints
and incidents at early childhood services and publishing.
In information about the directors regulatory approach,
we agree that the director can delegate their function
and powers including to someone who is not an employee
of the Ministry of Education for a specified period.
If the Secretary of Education consents in writing, um,
the guiding principles for regulating ECE services,
we have mentioned, um,
and we support the proposed principles A, B, and C.
We've got concerns with the new section 27 D and C.
We are concerned about the wording,
avoids imposing unnecessary costs in proposed new section 27
DD two.
How will the director decide what costs are unnecessary?
We are concerned that by including this requirement
to avoid imposing unnecessary costs,
there'll be a greater focus on cost saving when
making regulations. Uh,
Pauline? Yes.
I'm gonna ask you to bring your submission
to a close if you can please.
Right. Well I was almost towards the end of it,
the last part was really, we wanted to make sure
that there was, um, good clarification between the director
of Reg and the Secretary of Education.
Um, and this is in regard
to the avoiding imposing unnecessary costs.
So I'll leave it there. You have the submission,
you have all the recommendations.
I haven't covered all of them. Thank you.
Thanks so much. Appreciate the time, uh,
you've given us this afternoon.
Um, we're gonna move on to our next morning.
Good up. Thank you. I'm now,
I'm gonna invite the ECE Parents Council, uh, on Zoom
to join us for, um, 10 minutes.
So I think we've got Michelle Deno
Koto, can you hear me all?
We can. Um, are you able to turn your camera on please?
Great. Um, we've got 10 minutes with you this morning
or this afternoon rather, Michelle,
including any type of questions over to you. Thank
You. Uh, yeah,
Koto, everyone.
My name is Michelle Deno
and I'm here representing the ECE Parents Council of Alua.
Um, for those of you who don't know who we are,
we represent parents and caregivers across the MOTU
who want safe, high quality,
and affordable early childhood education for our tamari.
Uh, our core message is this, this bill puts profit
before children and its sidelines parents in whanau.
It does not align with the government's own budget,
2025 priorities of effective services lifting real incomes
or disciplines, public spending.
We ask that you reject this bill in its entirety.
Um, I don't have time to go into all of the points, um,
in our submission, but I thought I'd pull out
a few of the key ones.
Um, we strongly believe that this was a flawed
and exclusionary consultation process.
Um, the consultation summary report shows zero direct
engagement with parents, uh, has an n dash a in the table.
Um, I would've hoped that there could have at least been,
um, a group pulled together of parents brought into a room,
um, to actually speak with them directly.
Uh, our council wrote to the ministry asking
for representation on the early
childhood advisory committee.
Um, but we were refused.
We were told that they only wanted
to hear from providers, not from families.
Um, parents have literally been cut out
of decisions about our own children.
Standards and safety are also being eroded.
Those of us who have managed to become engaged
and understand
and interpret the really, really confusing language, um,
have found that key licensing criteria are being scrapped,
including those requiring parents
to be involved in learning decisions about their own
children and ensuring ity applications are
reflected in the curriculum.
Oversight is reduced to vague risk-based monitoring
that puts at risk and undermines trust.
Quality is being redefined,
and we are talking about bare minimum things we should be
fighting for increasing and lifting the bar,
but stripping away cultural richness
and responsiveness to our children.
That's what we expect as families,
or as for-profit providers would refer to us as the market.
We really are being treated as bill payers, not
as partners in education.
The government already gives 3.1 billion a year
to providers, plus 11 million family boost rebates.
Yet there are no controls on fees.
We remain exposed to rising costs,
and private providers aren't even required
to display their fees publicly.
Families can't easily compare costs despite paying
the bills and taxes.
In reality, childcare fees have surged.
CPI shows a temporary dip only because of family boost,
but the structural costs remain the highest in the world, up
to 38% of household income for two children.
This bill requires the crown to provide information
to parents to improve knowledge about services.
But that drafting language sounds to me like marketing paid
for by the taxpayer.
The government doesn't advertise private schools
or universities, so why should it promote
private childcare chains?
This is a highly profitable sector.
Brokers openly market childcare centers as one
of the most profitable investments in New Zealand.
A seller's market with pre-qualified buyers lining up
private providers are already doing well, fueled
by billions in public subsidies.
Yet this bill gives them what they want, fewer strings,
less oversight
and looser accountability, all at the expense
of families and our children.
We also feel that this is a breach of partnership with us
as whanau by removing licensing criteria like C 12 at Gut's,
parent involvement in decision making about our children
stripping out ity obligations, breached the principles
of partnership, participation and protection,
and creating a new sheriff role with sweeping delegations,
risk silencing parents.
Further families already fear reprisal for speaking out.
We know this at my ECE, so this could get way, way worse.
We think that the for-profit ECE lobbies
claim regulation is burdensome.
It's quite honestly, it's, it's offensive
to even use that term.
It's there to protect our children and keep them safe.
Evidence actually says otherwise.
And the report, um, results show that the majority
of people who responded said it was a problem
with the interpretation of the regulation.
So there wasn't an overwhelming sense
that regulations were an issue.
It was how they were being, um, interpreted on the ground.
To me, that talks to system failure
inside the centers management
and, um, culture within those, those centers.
That's not saying there's an issue
with the actual regulation.
So they are delivering strong profits
under the current rules.
That's only going to be, um,
they're only gonna do better, right?
Regulations are not strangling that sector.
Um, they are the bare minimum safeguards for children
and families and parents are actually fighting
to improve them, diluting them fat in profit margins,
but it does erode their accountability.
So in closing, this bill does not serve children,
parents, or whanau.
It lowers standards, raises risks, drains, family incomes,
and hands more power to the for-profit lobby on behalf
of parents across New Zealand, I urge you reject this bill.
Our children deserve better.
Um, and I'm happy to take questions.
Thanks Michelle. Uh, first question from Jan.
Thanks Michelle. And thank you for your submission
and your, uh, oral submission here this afternoon.
Very quickly. Do you think that with this bill,
if this bill goes through in its current format,
that parents would have more confidence
that their children would be taught well in an early
childhood education center and were safe?
No, not at all.
I think they would feel that it was about
to become like the wild, wild west out there
and more accountabi, we are going
to take all of the risk, right?
We are going to need to do so much research whilst fighting
new relaxed rules around not them not needing
to display a copy of their license
that's changing under the scrapping
of the licensing criteria.
They're no longer going to need to display a copy of
what the current licensing criteria are.
They're not going to either have to display, um, a copy of
how I can make a complaint as a parent.
So not only are you going to need
to delve into a rabbit hole of trying to figure out
what actually should be happening,
it's you are then also going to be having on top of your,
your job to find out what to even do about it.
Okay. Thank you. Yeah,
Thank you. I was looking
at your website
and it says that you have more than 1,200 members
and you represent parents and caregivers.
I'm keen to know what is the percentage of parents, uh,
of, um, um, early childhood, um, uh,
going children's parents.
What is the percentage of those parents as your members?
They, they're all, they're all parents with children
who are in early childhood education. Yeah.
So what is the percentage of the parents, such parents
that are your members?
They are that, that number,
that figure is they are all parents.
No, no, no. I know that. But if you look at nationwide,
if you look at nationwide,
there is like x number of parents, right? Oh,
Sorry. So you are asking
for the, you are asking for
what The total market share of our members?
Yes. What is the percentage? Yeah,
I have no idea, but I could probably find that out.
I'm sure the ECC council will have a, have the sizing of
what the market number is in, in, um, New Zealand.
Yeah, I was curious because your site said
1,200, that's why. And can I have a quick,
Um, no, that's all we've got time for this morning.
Okay. Thank you. Uh, thank this afternoon, Michelle.
I appreciate the time you've taken to present to us, um,
and answer those couple of questions we need to move on
to our next, um, submitter now. Thank
You So much. Thanks.
Thanks.
Okay. So, um, I'm now gonna invite, um,
Dr. Sarah Alexander from the Office of the Early Childhood,
um, education, who's in person.
Thanks for joining us, um, this afternoon.
We've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon, including time
for questions over to you.
Thank you so much. Um,
and thank you for the opportunity to speak, uh, today.
And I'd like to acknowledge, uh,
your vital role in scrutinizing the bill.
The first speaker in today's hearing on the bill, uh,
basically said that this bill is the best thing since the
invention of sliced bread.
Uh, well, I'm an actual early childhood expert.
I've also been involved in the sector for a very long time.
I can tell you about what it was like in the days
before funding in subsidies.
I researched the impacts
of the biggest ECE reform in the late 1980s,
early 1990s.
I've taught children and taught the teachers.
I've had five children with economist husband, Tony,
which enriches the knowledge
and analysis I can bring when commenting on ECE policy.
The Office of Early Childhood Education.
OECE is a membership based organization
for service providers
and others from all parts of sector community
and private parent and teacher based services, home-based
and center-based.
Those who join us support high quality ECE,
and they make children their priority.
The outcome of this bill appears to be pre predetermined.
Minister Seymour has already signaled to us
that the bill is a done deal.
The bill has been fast tracked to undercut genuine scrutiny
and public understanding.
The proposals haven't been tested with all affected groups.
The proposals haven't been consulted
with ECE experts yet.
This bill will significantly reshape ECE.
Has this committee received any modeling on the short
and long term costs of creating a new regulatory bureaucracy
and embedding labor market obligations into ECE operations
and funding Of the 39 submissions made available
on Parliament's website, so far only three
of those submissions express support
and two, including the Montessori Association support in
principle, yet call for major amendments due
to operational and quality risks.
The bill claims to improve regulatory effectiveness
for children and parents and reduce the regulatory burden
on service providers.
But let's be honest, it's misleading
to say this bill is designed to improve outcomes
for children and families.
Its true intent is to satisfy service providers
and their lobbyists who want a much lighter touch approach
to monitoring and enforcement.
And let's not forget the so-called regulatory burden,
because that's already been reduced through the removal
of many licensing criteria
and our submission, the Office
of Early Childhood Education highlighted the Cobra Effect.
The Cobra Effect is a term used by analysts
to describe when a solution ends up making
the original problem worse.
Here's what we are seeing.
The bill responds to perceived frustrations among service
providers, but is there any evidence
that these issues occur at a scale
or severity that justifies this kind
of legislative overhaul?
No. The proposed solutions risk worsening existing
problems, undermining child safety, eroding public trust,
and weakening the integrity of the sector.
And ironically, the reforms could backfire on the
very providers.
The bill claims to support the bill recasts, ECE,
as primarily a workforce participation tool.
It overlooks parents' rights to choose ECE
for child education only.
Re right or caregiving support
the bill in embeds new funding obligations
for government without clear cost modeling,
that's a huge must be a huge worry for you.
It encourages extended service hours, which drives up fees
and may push families out of formal ECE to make use
of more informal options.
The bill's definition of quality is flawed.
It equates minimum standards with quality,
yet real quality must go beyond the bare minimum.
It introduces risk, risk-based monitoring of services,
enabling selective scrutiny of services that is likely
to favor the large commercial providers
and those willing to litigate to scare off inspection
and any form of enforcement.
It frames child safety as negotiable
against cost efficiency.
The directive to avoid unnecessary costs
opens the door to further deregulation.
There's no commitment to stronger monitoring
and enforcement of minimum standards.
And what we see is that monitoring
and enforcement will become a lot softer.
The bill creates an unnecessary director
of regulation role within the Ministry of Education.
But Mr. Minister Seymour's speech at the first reading said
that the role would be an arrow
and not in the ministry as the bill states.
Since Aero lacks licensing
and enforcement powers,
there will be significant wasted set up costs
and sector disruption.
The bill offers no safeguards against the Minister
for regulations, political influence
over complaints handling compliance criteria
or enforcement strategy.
It allows deregulation of regulatory duties
to non-government individuals.
I haven't heard anyone else say this,
but if you read that bill again, it allows dereg, uh,
it allows delegation of regulatory duties
to non-government individuals
and organizations creating conflict of interest risks
with no scope, rationale or sunset clause.
Our recommendations for your report, please report back
to parliament that the bill must not proceed
beyond second reading.
It's not needed. As I've said, the effects
of the bill could bite back
and backfire on the very providers it aims to support
and who are very excited about it.
Currently, the purpose of regulating ECE is already clearly
and appropriately defined in the education,
early childhood services regulations,
and the current wording in the Education
and Training Act is good.
It positions the principal purpose of ECE
as regulating a system where all children are able
to to participate.
It also recognizes the importance of parent choice
and selecting the type of service
that suits the family without reducing ECE to a tool
for labor market participation.
If the bill does move forward, then the stated aim
of the bill must be revised.
The claim that it improves effectiveness for children
and families should be removed.
I'm happy to speak with you privately about political
and sector matters that cannot be publicly stated.
If the bill is passed in its current form,
the likely consequences include
significantly higher government costs
for lower quality ECE provision, weakened monitoring
and enforcement bias in favor of certain service providers.
Discretionary bias by the director of regulation,
reduced choice of enrollment hours
and diversity of services for families,
children spending longer hours
and subpar care environments, less provision
for children's individual health, cultural, social
and physical needs, developmental harm and long-term
and poor long-term outcomes for children
and parents withdrawing from ECE altogether.
Choosing instead to rely on babysitters
for informal care networks
or leave the workforce,
the bill will trigger serious unintended consequences,
undermining child safety and education, eroding public trust
and destabilizing the sector.
The oecs written submission goes into more detail
and anyone can view our submission.
And did you know, um, you would know that
during the last election, um, each
of the coalition partners proposed
constructive child-focused ideas that deserved
to be brought into light.
For example, national Party promised regular unannounced
Ministry of Education spot checks of ECE services
and ensuring that at all times of the day,
at least one adult working
with children in teacher lead centers is ECE teacher
Qualified Act Party, act party Promise
that ERO visits, uh, would,
that they would introduce ERO visits that are unannounced.
New Zealand first promised to review staffing ratios
for infants as an urgent health and safety matter.
Well, these are practical child-focused solutions.
So this is our plea.
Our plea is to please bring forward these kinds of solutions
instead of rushing through a bill
that risks doing real harm
and is going to have significant costs to children,
families, taxpayers, and this government. Thank you.
Thanks so much, um, for your time this afternoon.
That's all we have time for gonna, uh, move on
to our next. You're welcome. Appreciate
Your time.
Thanks sir. Thank you.
Now I gonna invite, um,
Amanda from the kindergartens associate, uh, kindergartens
got, um, 10 minutes with you this morning,
including time this afternoon, including time for questions.
Cool. So we'll jump straight in.
Cool. Thank you. Um, thanks
for the opportunity KO Amanda Ton Aho.
I'm the, um, one of the spokesperson at People
for kindergarten, and I'm the Chief executive
of Whanau Meki Free Kindergarten Association,
Uh, ua.
I'm the senior head teacher at Island Bay Kindergarten Koto.
I'm Jess Cooper. I'm the head teacher at
Wellington South Kindergarten.
We are here to present the submission on behalf
of kindergarten ua.
Kindergarten UA is a national collective
of community-based not-for-profit early childhood
education providers.
We operate around 260 licensed services across the country,
and we engage with over 12,000 tamari on any given day.
Collectively, we employ some 1600 qualified teachers
and over 300 support staff.
We have considerable experience working
with regulation across government institutions,
regional councils, and territorial authorities.
Um, you have our written submission, um,
which describes in more detail our concerns about
aspects of this bill.
So we want to just highlight a few elements
for the committee to note.
As you will know, this bill is one
or part of a wider sweep of changes to shift the focus
of ECA from the interest of children
to the interest of business.
It is the result of the first regulatory review undertaken
by the Ministry for Regulation.
The review's recommendations were simply accepted.
At no time did the government seek feedback from the sector
or invite public scrutiny,
as you've heard from previous submitters.
Um, the EC curriculum, Tiki is central to quality.
Early childhood education.
The regulations give effect to tiki, acknowledging
that all children have rights to protection
and promotion of their health, the right to equitable access
to learning, um, opportunities to have recognition
of their language, their culture and identity,
and increasing agency in their own lives.
These rights align closely with the concept of mana.
We're all born with potential
and we all deserve it to be upheld and supported to follow
and create opportunities.
The Ministry of Education sites multiple studies
that show the benefit of young children
and whanau participating in ECE.
The research shows there is better education
and vocational gains
and reduction to social inequalities in adulthood.
There is better mo emotional and social skills
before starting school.
Um, children perform better in maths, reading,
communication, and logical problem solving
during their primary and adolescent years.
The evidence clearly shows that the benefit
of quality ECE is both a private and a public good.
Just as primary, secondary,
and tertiary education is these benefits.
Um, uh, uh, these benefits, uh,
outcomes the government is looking
to achieve across the education system.
We are concerned that the amendments
to the act may distance ECE from the wider education sector
Revising the purpose of ECE regulation
and legislation was not part of the original terms
of reference and has not been debated.
The bill narrows the purpose.
The interests of children are no longer the primary f um,
focus workforce development is, it is this revised purpose
that decisions will be based on.
This implies standards could be minimized in order
to support participation in the labor market.
Standards are based on accepted research.
The current standards are based on accepted research
of the structural and process quality factors that need
to be in place to optimize children's learning.
None of that was considered in the development of this,
of the amendments to this bill.
The bill positions ECA as a cost, not as an investment.
And has the potential to reduce quality provision
and further undermine minimum standards.
Undermine the confidence appearance whanau in the community
in our ECE provision.
Ignore evidence relating to teaching
and learning to limit costs to providers.
Introduce a narrow regime of compliance as the focus
of service provision.
Shift early childhood education out of education
and position a CE as primarily a function
of the labor market.
The changes undermine over 30 years of
progress based on evidence of the benefits
of high quality early childhood education.
And our reputation as a world leader in ECE
regulations ensure the purpose
and the policy governing the ECE sector is adhered to
by licensed providers.
Children are the focus of the current regulations
and must remain the focus.
Anything else places children's wellbeing
and learning at unacceptable risk.
The best interests of the 200,000 plus children attending
ECE each day must be the priority for regulations.
This bill redirects the purpose of ECE from education
to workforce participation,
such a shift dilutes the foundational role
of ECE in supporting lifelong learning.
We urge you to reject the bill in its current form
and recommend further collaboration with the sector
to agree the purpose of ECE regulation
and the most effective way
to ensure regulation supports the provision
of high quality early childhood education for every child
and the appropriate settings to ensure transparency
and accountability for the use of public funds.
ECE must remain focused on providing all children
with a strong start to life, enabling them
to fulfill their potential.
We support strong regulations in the ECE sector
to ensure children are nurtured by skilled, knowledgeable,
and caring teachers in safe learning environments.
Na mahi, we are happy to take questions.
Thank you. Alright. No, you go first.
Um, thank you so much, chair.
Thank you so much, uh, for your submission.
Um, Mandy,
and can I just check one of the things you mentioned
around PHA key,
and we've heard from the previous speaker around the concern
that this would mean that more people will be disheartened
or lose faith in the EC sector or withdraw from EC sector.
What do you think it will have in terms
of the knock on effect to education pathways going into
primary and some of the targets
that go government's looking at in terms of literacy
and numeracy at a primary school level?
If people are not putting things like
at the center when it comes to ece,
We, we can't understand really why there are these attacks
on early childhood education
and are focus much more on positioning, um, as a business
because, um, the early years are so pivotal
in providing the foundations for children, um,
success in the schooling system.
Um, so we consider any moves that
that would undermine early childhood education
and limit children's participation in high quality early
childhood education as actually undermining the very, um,
focus of, of government in terms
of having successful learners later in life.
You spoke about the, uh, workforce
and, um, it just occurred to me around putting
that into the context of this bill, we have issues
around getting people and developing the workforce as it is.
Mm-hmm. Do, what do you see that this bill has the potential
to do to the work that's gone on in the last wee while
to try and address the issues that we've seen in
that area, if any?
Do you mean in terms of Well, what, what we know is that,
um, that, um, you know, that workforce participation
that both ECE
and the schooling system already, it's a secondary function
of schools and early childhood to provide, um, support
for families to be able to go out to work.
Um, and, but it's not the core purpose
and we schools are not designed to,
I don't, sorry, Mindy, I meant more along the lines
of the early childhood workforce.
You mentioned about the development of, um,
or having the importance of having the qualified,
high qualified skilled teachers there.
Do you see that this could, um, be a detriment to that,
I guess is what I'm trying to Oh,
Totally. Sorry.
That's that's okay. That's okay.
I get really grumpy when people, um,
talk about the focus being on the workforce.
Yeah. Because, um, it is, you know, it's not the, the job
of, um, schools to occupy children while their parents work.
And it shouldn't be the job of we're on
the same page of Yeah.
Cool. Um, in terms of the, the whole direction
and the of, of this bill
and other initiatives that have come through as a result
of the regulatory review
are very much focused on undermining qualifications
and workforce participation, um, and in early childhood.
And we're particularly concerned about that.
I'm a, I'm a service provider.
I provide as chief executive of Whanau Meki,
I operate a $77 million budget
and over 5,000 children attend our services.
I believe that regulation is incredibly important,
and this is a lowering of standards
and part of the lowering of standards is
to lower the standards of the qualifications of the, um,
people that work in early childhood education.
And that's a direct threat to the safety of children.
So we've, we are very concerned that, um, you know, that
or that a number of these policy decisions are undermining
quality in the early chartered, um, sector. Okay.
Thank you. Thanks so much. That's all.
We have time for this afternoon.
Appreciate the time we've taken to present
and I'll answer a couple of questions from us as well.
Thank you. Got, uh, KDO, we've now got Jess
and Rachel from nz, um, EI
who are on Zoom.
I understand it.
Kura, Koto, Ana Clark ua.
Um, I am a campaign advisor at n
and um, we have members, Jess Duff
and Rachel Graves joining us today.
Um, I will just be in the background to support them.
Great. Well, we've got 10 minutes with you this afternoon,
including any time for questions so far away.
Um, Koto, um, uh, first of all, thank you very much
for the opportunity to speak to our submission, um,
and we take our submission as read.
Um, my name is Jessica Duff.
Um, I'm an early childhood teacher
and a center manager for a privately owned early childhood
center in head of Tonga Hawke's Bay.
Um, I have a Bachelor of education in ECEA,
postgraduate diploma in educational leadership
and a master's of education.
Um, I also have three children of my own that have all gone
through early childhood education,
and I've been an early childhood teacher for 18 years.
Um, as a passionate
and experienced early childhood teacher,
I am very concerned about the proposed amendments
to the Education and Training Act.
It's clear that these amendments pose significant changes
to the purpose of early childhood education at nao, as well
as how the sector is regulated.
Myself as well as many, many of the colleagues
that I've consulted are very concerned
that these amendments may result in reducing quality
teaching and learning across the early learning sector.
Not only this, but the proposed changes undermine the safety
and wellbeing of our tamari, as well
as undermining the value
and importance of early childhood education.
As a public good quality early childhood
education provides a vital foundation
for the lifelong learning of al Tamari.
There is endless evidence which highlights the crucial role
that early childhood education plays
in children's development
and how important it is to get this right.
This is not opinion, this is fact in
we are lucky enough to have a world leading curriculum
in the mahi that happens in quality early childhood settings
here ensures that our ch, that our children are nurtured
and empowered as competent and confident learners
and communicators, healthy and mind, body
and spirit secure in their sense of belonging
and in the knowledge that they make valued contributions
to our society.
It's a direct quote from our curriculum to
the work we do every single day is important and complex.
Defining the purpose of our sector is to support the choice
of parents and caregivers
to participate in the labor market suggests that we
as teachers are valued only as babysitters to make sure
that the parents can get back to work faster.
This is insulting
and strips away our value as qualified,
trained professional educators.
And it also undermines the fact
that quality early childhood education is every child's
right, not a time filler while mom and dad are at work.
This bill does not uphold the rights of our tamari,
and it does nothing to address the actual issues
that are frequently reported by our members
that ultimately impact on tamari
and whanau, such as teacher shortages, huge workloads,
poor pay, and unworkable and unsafe ratios.
We recommend that this bill is abandoned
and does not progress.
Ura
Kira, Jess. Um,
Tina Ko, thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Um, my name is Rachel Graves
and I'm here as a parent of a child in kindergarten.
Um, I'm also a qualified ECE teacher
and a PhD student, um,
specializing in early childhood educational leadership.
And from all of these perspectives,
I'm deeply concerned about this bill.
Um, as a parent, my daughter's safety is everything,
and I trust her kindergarten
because it's backed by qualified teachers who know
and care for her and who are
supported by strong regulations.
If those protections are cut to save money,
parents like me will lose that trust overnight.
Also, in regards to, uh, workforce participation, um,
no parent should be forced to send their baby
to childcare out of financial necessity.
Um, yet personally within my antenatal group,
I was the only mother who had the privilege
of keeping my daughter home until three.
For the rest of them, the cost
of living left them with no choice.
Um, and if the goal really is
to support parents back into work,
deregulation will not fix.
Affordability costs are high
because profit is prioritized over children
and it is compounded by decades of underfunding.
Um, even a recent OECD report from this year has
specifically identified
that New Zealand's overreliance on private EC provision has
increased unaffordability for families.
Um, while our affordable not-for-profit services have proven
that with the right investment families in
Tamari will thrive.
Speaking, um, from my teacher hat,
I have never found regulations to be a burden actually
with adequate qualifications
and appropriate working conditions.
These are achievable and are essential
for keeping tamari safe.
Any change that you want to make
to our system should come from the ground up.
It should be led by the people who know best,
the qualified teachers who work with children every day,
and the academics who divide the careers
to researching best practice
and never by anybody who has financial interests.
Um, I also have a question around the new director
of regulations, um, role,
how they will measure their success
regarding the proposed guiding principles.
What KPIs will accurately capture children's wellbeing
and readiness for school without reducing
quality teaching to a text box?
Exercise. If this becomes a paper exercise,
it will disempower children in short term tamari.
Um, I think some may call this bill a simplification,
but in truth, it adds confusion, risks,
misinterpretation, and threatens quality.
If we truly want to strengthen ECE,
we need to put children first.
We need to listen to teach research, remove profit
and guarantee fully qualified teachers and improve ratios.
Um, for the sake of our tamari, I urge, uh, the committee
to abandon this bill in its entirety.
Ami,
Thank you. Uh,
question first from
Lawrence. Thank you Chair. I,
I have two questions, um,
but the first one's more make one, one.
Okay. Jan, there's, okay.
Um, in that case, I want to pick up on something that,
um, you may have information of
or maybe further, um, thoughts around, which is around some
of the conversations that come out of treasury in terms
of this particular bill
and supporting this initiative
where the treasury's recommendation was
to not support the ECE funding review due to cost
and also due to, um, the regulatory changes,
whether it's actually lack of clarity, both in terms
of the cost of the review,
but also in terms of the, um, the cost of,
um, the implementation.
I wanna check with you in terms of how would
that cost affect the broader ECE sector
in terms of the way that we're going?
'cause um, Rachel, you mentioned
before in terms of some of the stats
around ECE from a global and OECD perspective.
So what would that mean?
Sorry, you're saying that what would,
what would a regulatory review of our funding model mean?
Yeah, Um, I mean it has a lot of implications.
I probably am not the best expert to speak on that.
More like Mandy, um,
would probably be able to give a better response.
But I mean, when we are looking at, what was it,
$2.7 billion, I think that,
I'm not sure if I've got that correct.
We have exorbitantly high amounts
of government funds going into ECE that is predominantly
covering, uh, subsidies.
So when you look at that, you know, where,
where is that money really going?
Um, I can't really see how a a,
a funding model review would improve that, um,
rather than putting more profits, you know,
to for profit providers.
So just checking what you're saying is
that not only is the review itself is costly from a
government to budget perspective, but the, the cost itself
and the funding that's going towards CEC are also not going
towards the educators and the kids.
No, exactly. Exactly.
Um, I'll just add to that.
The, um, you'll probably be able to respond. Yeah.
Just, um, picking up, um, on your question, Lawrence, the,
the regulatory impact statement that AC company,
this bill also rejected, um,
the contents of the bill.
I don't remember it saying anything about the funding
review, um, which is being run sort of alongside, uh,
this mahi here.
Um, but yes, I think that it's important to consider
what those experts at Treasury, um,
and within the Ministry of Education have had
to say on the progress of this bill.
Um, the regulatory review as a whole,
and the, the upcoming funding review.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
That's, um, all, we've got time for this afternoon.
Appreciate the time we've taken to present to the committee.
Um, we're now gonna move into private, so if I can, um,
thank you everyone who's been here to present this morning,
um, and invite the advisors to the table and, um.